subscriptions and live queries - real time with graphql (#229)
the-guild-org/the-guild-website: pages/blog/subscriptions-and-live-queries-real-time-with-graphql.mdx

Furthermore, the library is not maintained that well. My PRs for making the library compatible with recent GraphQL versions were not merged. Using unions and interfaces was impossible
Having to patch a library with `patch-package` before even being usable is generally a bad sign.

1. Automatically updates clients. **Yes.** ✅

When implementing our schema conform to the library, this library delivers precise results once the immutable state has changed.

2. Efficiently updates clients. **Yes.** ✅

Initially a result tree is sent to the client. Afterwards, only JSON patches that must be applied to the initial result are sent to the client.

3. Flexibility. **Kind of.** ✳️

We don't rely on any third party services, however, we forced into immutability to some extend.

4. Adaptability. **It depends.** ✳️

Adding a immutable layer to our existing schema might be a pretty big change. Furthermore, the library does lack support for some GraphQL features such as Interfaces and Unions.

## GraphQL Live Queries via the `@live` directive

> There are companies out there, like [Facebook](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BSw05rJaCpA), that are already using this approach. There is also a graphql framework available in go that supports live queries out of the box! Check out [thunde](https://github.com/samsarahq/thunder).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are companies out there, like [Facebook](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BSw05rJaCpA), that are already using this approach. There is also a graphql framework available in go that supports live queries out of the box! Check out [thunder](https://github.com/samsarahq/thunder).
```

The idea behind the `@live` directive is that it is used to mark that the client is interested in keeping that query execution result as up to date as possible. The implementation, however, is up to user-land.

```graphql
query($id: ID!) @live {
  post(id: $id) {
    id
    title
    totalLikeCount
  }
}
```

The idea of just making any query without additional overhead a live query is very appealing from the view of a frontend developer.
From a backend perspective, however that raises new questions.

> Just adding adirective on the operation on frontend won't make the whole backend reactive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just adding a directive on the operation on frontend won't make the whole backend reactive.
```

> After having built an example app with `graphql-live-subscriptsions` from scratch, studing the flaws of that library and being uncomfortable with the vendor lock-in of services such as Postgraphile and Hasura, I decided to approach the problem of live queries in a more pluggable way, by using the `@live` directive.

Reviewer: ```auggestion
After having built an example app with `graphql-live-subscriptions` from scratch, studying the flaws of that library and being uncomfortable with the vendor lock-in of services such as PostGraphile and Hasura, I decided to approach the problem of live queries in a more pluggable way, by using the `@live` directive.
```

### `@n1ru4l/graphql-live-query` A common definition and set of utilities for determining of a live query

This module provides two things.

1. `GraphQLLiveDirective` that can be added to any schema.

```ts
import { GraphQLSchema, specifiedDirectives } from 'graphql';
import { GraphQLLiveDirective } from '@n1ru4l/graphql-live-query';
import { query, mutation, subscription } from './schema';

const schema = new GraphQLSchema({
  query,
  mutation,
  subscription,
  directives: [
    GraphQLLiveDirective,
    /* Keep @defer/@stream/@if/@skip */ ...specifiedDirectives,
  ],
});
```

2. `isLiveQueryOperationDefinitionNode`

> This is a simple function that takes a `DocumentNode` and returns `true` if it is a live query document.

Reviewer: It takes an `OperationDefinitionNode`, not a `DocumentNode` though, right?

Author: ```suggestion
This is a simple function that takes an `OperationDefinitionNode` and returns `true` if it is a live query document.
```

Those two utility functions can be used for any live query implementation.

> ### `@n1ru4l/in-memory-live-query-store` Keep track and invalidate resources selected by a live query in a efficient, but in generic way

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `@n1ru4l/in-memory-live-query-store` Keep track and invalidate resources selected by a live query in an efficient, but generic way
```

const schema = new GraphQLSchema({
  query,
  mutation,
  subscription,
  directives: [
    GraphQLLiveDirective,
    /* Keep @defer/@stream/@if/@skip */ ...specifiedDirectives,
  ],
});
```

2. `isLiveQueryOperationDefinitionNode`

This is a simple function that takes a `OperationDefinitionNode` and returns `true` if it is a live query document.

Those two utility functions can be used for any live query implementation.

### `@n1ru4l/in-memory-live-query-store` Keep track and invalidate resources selected by a live query in an efficient, but generic way

The `InMemoryLiveQueryStore.execute` function is a drop in replacement for the `execute` function provided by the `graphql` package.

When encountering a query operation that is marked with the `@live` directive it will return a `AsyncIterator` instead of a `Promise` that can be used for sending multiple results to the client. Similar to how `subscribe` works.

Internally, the store keeps track of the resources selected in the live query operation selection set.
That means all root query field coordinates (e.g. `Query.post`) and global resource identifiers (e.g. `Post:1`).

> The store can than be notified to re-execute live query operations that select a given root query field or resource identifier via the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore.invalidate` method with the corresponding resource identifier or field coordinates.

Author: ```suggestion
The store can then be notified to re-execute live query operations that select a given root query field or resource identifier via the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore.invalidate` method with the corresponding resource identifier or field coordinates.
```

```ts
import { InMemoryLiveQueryStore } from '@n1ru4l/in-memory-live-query-store';
import { parse } from 'graphql';
import { schema } from './schema';

const inMemoryLiveQueryStore = new InMemoryLiveQueryStore();

const rootValue = {
  todos: [
    {
      id: '1',
      content: 'Foo',
      isComplete: false,
    },
  ],
};

inMemoryLiveQueryStore
  .execute({
    schema,
    operationDocument: parse(/* GraphQL */ `
      query todosQuery @live {
        todos {
          id
          content
          isComplete
        }
      }
    `),
    rootValue: rootValue,
    contextValue: {},
    variableValues: null,
    operationName: 'todosQuery',
  })
  .then(async (result) => {
    if (isAsyncIterable(result)) {
      for (const value of result) {
        // Send to client in real-world app :)
        console.log(value);
      }
    }
  });

// Invalidate by resource identifier
rootValue.todos[0].isComplete = true;
inMemoryLiveQueryStore.invalidate(`Todo:1`);

// Invalidate by root query field coordinate
rootValue.todos.push({ id: '2', content: 'Baz', isComplete: false });
inMemoryLiveQueryStore.invalidate(`Query.todos`);
```

> When using a ORM library such as prisma we can simply add a middleware for automatically invalidating resource.

Author: ```suggestion
When using a ORM library such as prisma we can simply add a middleware for automatically invalidating resources.
```

**Use prisma middleware for resource invalidation**

```ts
// Register Middleware for automatic model invalidation
prisma.$use(async (params, next) => {
  const resultPromise = next(params);

  if (params.action === 'update') {
    resultPromise.then((res) => {
      if (res?.id) {
        // invalidate `Post:1` on update
        liveQueryStore.invalidate(`${params.model}:${res.id}`);
      }
    });
  }

  return resultPromise;
});
```

The transports `graphql-ws` (GraphQL over WebSocket), `graphql-helix` (GraphQL over SEE) and `@n1ru4l/socket-io-graphql-server` (GraphQL over Socket.io), support providing a custom `execute` function that is allowed to return AsyncIterables (thanks to the recent changes required for `@defer` and `@stream`).

> All we have to do is to pass the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore.execute` to our server!

Author: ```suggestion
All we have to do is to pass the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore.execute` to our server factory!
```

```ts
import { InMemoryLiveQueryStore } from '@n1ru4l/in-memory-live-query-store';
import { parse } from 'graphql';
import { schema } from './schema';

const inMemoryLiveQueryStore = new InMemoryLiveQueryStore();

const rootValue = {
  todos: [
    {
      id: '1',
      content: 'Foo',
      isComplete: false,
    },
  ],
};

inMemoryLiveQueryStore
  .execute({
    schema,
    operationDocument: parse(/* GraphQL */ `
      query todosQuery @live {
        todos {
          id
          content
          isComplete
        }
      }
    `),
    rootValue: rootValue,
    contextValue: {},
    variableValues: null,
    operationName: 'todosQuery',
  })
  .then(async (result) => {
    if (isAsyncIterable(result)) {
      for (const value of result) {
        // Send to client in real-world app :)
        console.log(value);
      }
    }
  });

// Invalidate by resource identifier
rootValue.todos[0].isComplete = true;
inMemoryLiveQueryStore.invalidate(`Todo:1`);

// Invalidate by root query field coordinate
rootValue.todos.push({ id: '2', content: 'Baz', isComplete: false });
inMemoryLiveQueryStore.invalidate(`Query.todos`);
```

> When using a ORM such as prisma we can simply add a middleware for automatically invalidating resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using an ORM such as Prisma, we can simply add a middleware for automatically invalidating resources.
```

> **Use prisma middleware for resource invalidation**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Use Prisma middleware for resource invalidation**
```

**Example with graphql-ws**

```tsx
import http from 'http';
import ws from 'ws'; // yarn add ws
import { useServer } from 'graphql-ws/lib/use/ws';
import { subscribe } from 'graphql';
import { InMemoryLiveQueryStore } from '@n1ru4l/in-memory-live-query-store';
import { parse } from 'graphql';
import { schema } from './schema';

const inMemoryLiveQueryStore = new InMemoryLiveQueryStore();

const server = http.createServer(function weServeSocketsOnly(_, res) {
  res.writeHead(404);
  res.end();
});

const wsServer = new ws.Server({
  server,
  path: '/graphql',
});

useServer(
  {
    schema,
    execute: inMemoryLiveQueryStore.execute,
    subscribe,
  },
  wsServer
);

server.listen(443);
```

### `@n1ru4l/graphql-live-query-patch`

Optional JSON patch middleware for smaller payloads over the wire.

Instead of making JSON patch required be default, it is a totally optional module, that can be applied on the client and the server for deflating (create patches on the server) and inflating (apply patches on the client) the execution results.
Smaller projects might even be better off not using JSON patch at all, as the patch payload might be bigger as the whole query result.

> On the server adding the patch generation middleware is easy function compositon:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the server adding the patch generation middleware is easy function composition:
```

**Example with `graphql-ws`**

```ts
import { pipe } from 'io-ts/lib/function';
import { makeAsyncIterableIteratorFromSink } from '@n1ru4l/push-pull-async-iterable-iterator';
import { createApplyLiveQueryPatch } from '@n1ru4l/graphql-live-query-patch';
import { createClient } from 'graphql-ws/lib/use/ws';

const client = createClient({
  url: 'ws://localhost:3000/graphql',
});

const applyLiveQueryPatch = createApplyLiveQueryPatch()

const asyncIterator = pipe(
  makeAsyncIterableIteratorFromSink((sink) => {
    const dispose = client.subscribe(
      {
        query: 'query @live { hello }',
      },
      {
        next: sink.next,
        error: sink.error,
        complete: sink.complete,
      }
    );
    return () => dispose();
  }),
  applyLiveQueryPatch
);

// stop live query after 5 seconds.
setTimeout(() => {
  asyncIterator.return();
}, 5000);

for await (const executionResult of asyncIterator) {
  console.log(executionResult);
}
```

So let's take a look at this implementation regarding the aspects we used before.

1. Automatically update the clients. **Yes.** ✅

> The approach of pushing the invalidation responsibility to the user might at first seem like a drawback, but a smart abstraction (such as a ORM middleware), can result in pretty responsive applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The approach of pushing the invalidation responsibility to the server might at first seem like a drawback, but a smart abstraction (such as a ORM middleware), can result in pretty responsive applications.
```

2. Efficiently updates clients. **Yes.** ✅

> In case our execution result payloads are getting to big we can easily enable JSON patches by adding a middleware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case our execution result payloads are getting too big we can easily enable JSON patches by adding a middleware.
```

Furthermore, the middleware is totally live query implementation independent!
That means if our projects requires a different implementation of the live query engine, the middleware can still be applied as long as the execution result is compatible with the live query execution result format.

3. Flexibility. **Yes.** ✅

> Any database or third party api, can be used as long as we can somehow invalidate the resource (via some PubSub system etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any database or third-party API can be used as long as we can somehow invalidate the resource (via some PubSub system etc.).
```

As all incorporated libraries are pretty pluggable only a few can be used and others be replaced by something that might make more sense for a specific project.

4. Adaptability. **Yes.** ✅

> This library to can be added to any existing GraphQL.js schema without hazzle. Resource invalidation code can be added to the mutation resolvers over time as parts as frontend developers complain about live queries not updating.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This library can be added to any existing GraphQL.js schema without any hassle. Resource invalidation code can be added to the mutation resolvers over time gradually to reflect the needs of the frontend.
```

This just made you sound like a jerk :)

The possibilities of resource invalidation are endless and the logic for those can be added incrementally.
E.g. via a ORM middleware, in our mutation code or maybe even on our GraphQL gateway.

[GraphQL Live Query libraries and example todo app that sync across all connected clients.](https://github.com/n1ru4l/graphql-live-query)

[More information on how the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore` keeps track of resources here.](https://dev.to/n1ru4l/collecting-graphql-live-query-resource-identifier-with-graphql-tools-5fm5)

## What's next?

> I hope that more people will try exploring possibilities with GraphQL live queries. Eventually, we coul even come up with an official RFC for the spec!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope that more people will try exploring the possibilities of GraphQL live queries. Eventually, we could even come up with an official RFC for the spec!
```

There is a lot of more to explore such as

> - Partial query re-execution. (which actually already do-able today with relay conform schemas by building an ad-hoc query or by building an adhoc schema on the fly)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Partial query re-execution (which is actually already doable today with Relay conform schemas by building an ad-hoc query or by building an ad-hoc schema on the fly)
```

Not really clear to me what you mean here, but maybe it's just me

Each subscription root field must provide a `subscribe` function that returns an `AsyncIterator` and optionally has a `resolve` function for mapping the published events.

When a subscription operation is executed, the `subscribe` function of that field resolver is called and the `AsyncIterator` returned by it will be used as the source for the stream of events returned to the client.

Once the `AsyncIterator` publishes a value (the payload or event), the optional `resolve` function on the selected subscription root field is called with the value. All subsequently executed resolvers in the resolver/type tree behave like normal query resolvers.

The most basic implementation for a counter would look similar to this:

```ts
const sleep = (t = 1000) => new Promise((res) => setTimeout(res, t));

const resolvers = {
  Subscription: {
    countToNumber: {
      subscribe: async function* (_, args) {
        for (let counter = 1; counter <= args.toNumber; counter++) {

>           yield { countToNumber };

Author: ```suggestion
          yield { countToNumber: counter };
```

The possibilities of resource invalidation are endless and the logic for those can be added incrementally.
E.g. via a ORM middleware, in our mutation code or maybe even on our GraphQL gateway.

[GraphQL Live Query libraries and example todo app that sync across all connected clients.](https://github.com/n1ru4l/graphql-live-query)

[More information on how the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore` keeps track of resources here.](https://dev.to/n1ru4l/collecting-graphql-live-query-resource-identifier-with-graphql-tools-5fm5)

## What's next?

I hope that more people will try exploring the possibilities of GraphQL live queries. Eventually, we could even come up with an official RFC for the spec!

There is a lot of more to explore such as

- Partial query re-execution (e.g. by building ad-hoc queries that only select affected resources)
- Mechanisms for batching similar query operations (e.g. for preventing execution of same operation multiple times after invalidation)
- What ever is bothering you while reading this article! 😄

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- A better format for patches as JSON patch performs rather poorly on list diffs)

```

**Schema Types for `graphql-live-subscriptions`**

```graphql
scalar JSON

type RFC6902Operation {
    op: String!
    path: String!
    from: String
    value: JSON
  }

type Subscription {
  live: {
    patch: [RFC6902Operation]
    query: Query
  }
}
```

A live query operation can be declared similar to our `PostSubscription` document above.

```ts
const PostSubscription = graphql`
  subscription PostSubscription($postId: ID!, $userId: ID!) {
    live {
      query {
        post(id: $postId) {
          id
          title
          totalLikeCount
        }
        user(id: $userId) {
          id
          name
        }
      }
      patch {
        op
        path
        from
        value
      }
    }
  }
`;
```

The difference is that the type returned by the `live` field has two fields instead of a single one.
The `query` field, which selects the selection set from `Query` tyoe and a `patch` field which is a JSON Patch operation.
When executing the given operation against the server the initial result will have the data selected by the `query` field selection set included.

> All following values, will have no `query` value (`null`), but instead a array of patch operations that describe the changes for updating the last result to the next result.

Reviewer 2: Just a small grammatical correction: It should be `an array`

Author: ```suggestion
All following values will have no `query` value (`null`), but instead an array of patch operations that describe the changes for updating the last result to the next result.
```

All we have to do is to pass the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore.execute` to our server factory!

**Example with graphql-ws**

```tsx
import http from 'http';
import ws from 'ws'; // yarn add ws
import { useServer } from 'graphql-ws/lib/use/ws';
import { subscribe } from 'graphql';
import { InMemoryLiveQueryStore } from '@n1ru4l/in-memory-live-query-store';
import { parse } from 'graphql';
import { schema } from './schema';

const inMemoryLiveQueryStore = new InMemoryLiveQueryStore();

const server = http.createServer(function weServeSocketsOnly(_, res) {
  res.writeHead(404);
  res.end();
});

const wsServer = new ws.Server({
  server,
  path: '/graphql',
});

useServer(
  {
    schema,
    execute: inMemoryLiveQueryStore.execute,
    subscribe,
  },
  wsServer
);

server.listen(443);
```

### `@n1ru4l/graphql-live-query-patch`

Optional JSON patch middleware for smaller payloads over the wire.

> Instead of making JSON patch required be default, it is a totally optional module, that can be applied on the client and the server for deflating (create patches on the server) and inflating (apply patches on the client) the execution results.

Reviewer 2: Just a small grammatical correction: It should be `required by default`

Author: ```suggestion
Instead of making JSON patch required by default, it is a totally optional module, that can be applied on the client and the server for deflating (create patches on the server) and inflating (apply patches on the client) the execution results.
```

As all incorporated libraries are pretty pluggable only a few can be used and others be replaced by something that might make more sense for a specific project.

4. Adoptability. **High.** ✅

This library can be added to any existing GraphQL.js schema without any hassle. Resource invalidation code can be added to the mutation resolvers over time gradually to reflect the needs of the frontend.
The possibilities of resource invalidation are endless and the logic for those can be added incrementally.
E.g. via a ORM middleware, in our mutation code or maybe even on our GraphQL gateway.

[GraphQL Live Query libraries and example todo app that sync across all connected clients.](https://github.com/n1ru4l/graphql-live-query)

[More information on how the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore` keeps track of resources here.](https://dev.to/n1ru4l/collecting-graphql-live-query-resource-identifier-with-graphql-tools-5fm5)

## What's next?

I hope that more people will try exploring the possibilities of GraphQL live queries. Eventually, we could even come up with an official RFC for the spec!

> There is a lot of more to explore such as

Reviewer 2: I'd rather state: `There is a lot more to explore` - without the `of`.

Author: ```suggestion
There is a lot more to explore such as
```

Author: thank you for all the typo fixes 😄

- Partial query re-execution (e.g. by building ad-hoc queries that only select affected resources)
- Mechanisms for batching similar query operations (e.g. for preventing execution of same operation multiple times after invalidation)
- What ever is bothering you while reading this article! 😄

> - A better format for patches as JSON patch performs rather poorly on list diffs)

Author: ```suggestion
- A better format for patches (as JSON patch performs rather poorly on list diffs)
```

A subscription operation looks similar to this.

```graphql
subscription onPostAddedSubscription {
  onPostAdded {
    post {
      id
      author {
        id
        login
      }
    }
  }
}
```

In contrast to GraphQL query operation a subscription operation is only allowed to select a single field on the GraphQL Subscription root type.

Furthermore, executing a subscription operation represents a stream of results where executing a query operation only results in a single result.

Let's take a quick look at the `graphql-js` reference implementation!

Since promises can not represent multiple values over time, the `graphql-js` reference implementations uses [`AsyncIterator`](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-asynciterable-interface), which is a native structure similar to Obserables (which you might already know if you have digged a bit deeper into the most-widely adopted GraphQL client frameworks).

Each subscription root field must provide a `subscribe` function that returns an `AsyncIterator` and optionally has `resolve` function for mapping the values published by the `AsyncIterator`. The default resolver will simply forward the payload.

> Behind the curtains the most popular implementations then rely on a event emitter (pubsub) that is wrapped to function as a `AsyncIterator`.

Author: Memo for myself: remove this sentence as it is explained in detail below.

Since promises can not represent multiple values over time, the `graphql-js` reference implementations uses [`AsyncIterator`](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-asynciterable-interface), which is a native structure similar to Obserables (which you might already know if you have digged a bit deeper into the most-widely adopted GraphQL client frameworks).

Each subscription root field must provide a `subscribe` function that returns an `AsyncIterator` and optionally has `resolve` function for mapping the published events.

When a subscription operation is executed, the `subscribe` function of that field resolver is called and the `AsyncIterator` returned by it will be used as the source for the source of events.

Once the `AsyncIterator` publishes a value (payload/event), the optional `resolve` function on the selected subscription root field, is called with the value. All following resolvers in the resolver/type tree behave like normal query resolvers.

The most basic implementation for a counter would look similar to this:

```ts
const sleep = (t = 1000) => new Promise(res => setTimeout(res, t));

const resolvers = {
    Subscription: {
        countToNumber: {

>             subscribe: async function (_, args) {

Author: ```suggestion
            subscribe: async function* (_, args) {
```

function fetchOrSubscribe(operation: RequestParameters, variables: Variables) {
  return Observable.create((sink) => {
    if (!operation.text) {
      return sink.error(new Error('Operation text cannot be empty'));
    }
    return subscriptionsClient.subscribe(
      {
        operationName: operation.name,
        query: operation.text,
        variables,
      },
      {
        ...sink,
        error: (err) => {
          if (err instanceof Error) {
            sink.error(err);
          } else if (err instanceof CloseEvent) {
            sink.error(
              new Error(
                `Socket closed with event ${err.code}` + err.reason
                  ? `: ${err.reason}` // reason will be available on clean closes
                  : ''
              )
            );
          } else {
            // GraphQLError[]
            sink.error(new Error(err.map(({ message }) => message).join(', ')));
          }
        },
      }
    );
  });
}

const network = Network.create(fetchOrSubscribe, fetchOrSubscribe);
const store = new Store(new RecordSource());
export const environment = new Environment({ network, store });
```

> With this configuration relay can now execute subscription operations. Because the graphql-ws protocol is way more complex than the GraphQL over HTTP protocol, we use the client exported from teh graphql-ws package instead. Some additional bundle-size we got there. As mentioned before SSE might be a better leight-weight alternative.

Author: ```suggestion
With this configuration, relay can now execute subscription operations. Because the graphql-ws protocol is way more complex than the GraphQL over HTTP protocol, we use the client exported from the graphql-ws package instead. Some additional bundle-size we got there. As mentioned before SSE might be a better light-weight alternative.
```

> That aside, lets start with a basic subscriptions that should update one of our components.

Author: ```suggestion
That aside, let's start with a basic subscription that should update one of our components.
```

Our `PostRender` already shows some content.

```ts
const PostQuery = graphql`
  query PostQuery($postId: ID!) {
    post(id: $postId) {
      id
      title
      content {
        text
      }
      totalLikeCount
    }
  }
`;

const PostRenderer = ({ postId }: { postId: string }) => {
  const { props } = useQuery(PostQuery, /* variables */ { postId });

  return <Post {...props} />;
};
```

> As a new feature requirement the like count of the post should get updated once someone hits the like button.

Author: ```suggestion
As a new feature requirement, the like count of the post should get updated once someone hits the like button.
```

We could choose different ways of implementing such a subscription.

1. General Subscription for changed post

```graphql
subscription PostChanged($postId: ID!) {
  onPostChanged(postId: $postId) {
    post {
      id
      totalLikeCount
    }
  }
}
```

2. Specific Subscription

```graphql
subscription PostLikeCountChanged($postId: ID!) {
  onPostLikeCountChanged(postId: $postId) {
    totalLikeCount
  }
}
```

Both solutions have different implications.

1. General Subscription for changed post

> It is not limited on notifying whether the `totalLikeCount` of the post likes have changed, in the future we could adjust the selection set on the post field as it also returns a `Post` type similar to our already existing `Query.post` field.

Author: ```suggestion
It is not limited to notifying whether the `totalLikeCount` of the post likes have changed, in the future we could adjust the selection set on the post field as it also returns a `Post` type similar to our already existing `Query.post` field.
```

It will automatically update the post record already in the cache as the relay store (or apollo-store) can identify the post object via the id field.
The drawback is that you could potentially send too much data over the wire. E.g. if we also wanted to subscribe to title changes all additional selected fields are sent to the client each time the underlying event is emitted, even if only the `totalLikeCount` value has changed.

```tsx
const PostChangedSubscription = graphql`
  subscription PostChanged($postId: ID!) {
    onPostChanged(postId: $postId) {
      post {
        id
        totalLikeCount
      }
    }
  }
`;

const PostRenderer = ({ postId }: { postId: string }) => {
  const { props } = useQuery(PostQuery, /* variables */ { postId });
  // thats all we gotta do
  useSubscription(PostChangedSubscription, /* variables */ { postId });

  return <Post {...props} />;
};
```

2. Specific Subscription

> This subscription is specifically designed for only a update of the `totalCount`. However, the subscription result returns no `Post` type. Therefore we cannot make use of the automatic cache updates via the `id`.

Author: ```suggestion
This subscription is specifically designed for only an update of the `totalCount`. However, the subscription result returns no `Post` type. Therefore we cannot make use of the automatic cache updates via the `id`.
```

We have to additionally define a handler for updating the post in the cache.

```tsx
const PostLikeCountChangedSubscription = graphql`
  subscription PostLikeCountChanged($postId: ID!) {
    onPostLikeCountChanged(postId: $postId) {
      totalCount
    }
  }
`;

const PostRenderer = ({ postId }: { postId: string }) => {
  const { props } = useQuery(PostQuery, /* variables */ { postId });
  useSubscription(
    PostLikeCountChangedSubscription,
    /* variables */ { postId },
    {
      // we need to manually update the cache :(

>       updater: (payload, cache) => {

Author: TODO: I used dummy cache update code here; should use the real-world relay api

        const record = cache.read(PostQuery, { postId });
        if (record) {
          record.likes.totalCount = payload.onPostLikeCountChanged.totalCount;
        }
      },
    }
  );

  return <Post {...props} />;
};
```

> Obviously, for this example no sane person would actually want to choose the second solution over the first one.

Author: ```suggestion
Obviously, for this example, no sane person would actually want to choose the second solution over the first one.
```

The easy solution is to just refetch a complete list every time a single item is added/removed/changed.
However, For a list containing hundreds of items only sending the changed item to the client might be the smarter solution...

This can be implemented via a union type.

```graphql
type OnUserAdded {
  user: User!
}
type OnUserRemoved {
  removedUserId: ID!
}

union OnUserListChange = OnUserAdded | OnUserRemoved

type Subscription {
  onUserListChange: OnUserListChange!
}
```

The corresponding code, including handling the cache updates:

```tsx
const UserListQuery = graphql`
  query UserListQuery {
    users {
      id
      name
    }
  }
`

const UserListChangeSubscription = graphql`
  subscription UserListChangeSubscription {
    onUserListChange {
      __typename
      ... on OnUserAdded {
        user {
          id
          name
        }
      }
      ... on OnUserRemoved {
        removedUserId
      }
    }
  }
`

const UserListRenderer = ({ postId }: { postId: string}) => {
  const {props} = useQuery(UserListQuery)
  useSubscription(UserListChangeSubscription,  /* variables */ { postId }, {
    // we need to manually update the cache :(

>     updater: (payload, cache) => {

Author: TODO: I used dummy cache update code here; should use the real-world relay api

Fortunately, Relay contributers have [worked on some nice query directives](https://github.com/facebook/relay/issues/3123) that allow reducing such cache update code. It won't cover all cases though.

In all of the above examples we responded (more or less implicit) to data change events.

Subscriptions can be used to apply data changes on the client. But they are probably not the best tool for that.

Before taking a look of what could be a better tool, let's look at another usage example for subscriptions.

```tsx
const OnPlaySound = graphql`
  subscription OnPlayChatSound {
    onPlayChatSound {
      soundUrl
    }
  }
`;

const ChatRenderer = () => {
  const chat = useQuery(ChatQuery);
  useSubscription(OnPlaySound, {
    onNext: (payload) => {
      playSound(payload.onPlayChatSound.soundUrl);
    },
  });

  return <Chat chat={chat} />;
};
```

The difference here is that we are not manipulating our existing data but rather executing a side effect.

Subscriptions can also be used for side-effects that should not alter or touch any data in the cache.

# Live Queries

> What is a live query? Well... there is no specification for that so the term is ambigous. Today, there are several solutions used one could describe as live-queries.

Author: ```suggestion
What is a live query? Well... there is no specification for that so the term is ambiguous. Today, there are several solutions used one could describe as live-queries.
```

All those solutions have one thing in common: **Trying to keep the Client State in Sync with the Server**.

Which can be paraphrased as **observing data**.

> Before we take a look at how all of those implementations, let's break down what I would expect from a live query implementation.

Author: ```suggestion
Before we take a look at how all of those implementations, let's break down what we should expect from a live query implementation.
```

Another drawback of subscriptions for live queries is the limitation of only selecting one root subscription field, which is defined by the GraphQL subscription specification. Furthermore, we must also redeclare our query type fields to the subscription type.

There is a workaround we can apply for re-exporting the whole Query type via a sub-field in the subscription type.

```graphql
type Query {
  user(id: ID!): User
  post(id: ID!): Post
}

type Subscription {
  live: Query!
}
```

This approach would allow us to query everything on the query object type via the live field on the subscription object type, without having the limit of only being able to query one resource or having to redeclare every resource field resolver on the subscription type. Neat!

```ts
const PostSubscription = graphql`
  subscription PostSubscription($postId: ID!, $userId: ID!) {
    live {
      post(id: $postId) {
        id
        title
        totalLikeCount
      }
      user(id: $userId) {
        id
        name
      }
    }
  }
`;
```

Okay, now we can select everything we could have selected with our query operation!

1. Automatically updates execution result. **Yes.** ✅

> When using services as Postgraphile and Hasura that is the case. However, if you have any additional resolvers that are added on top of the service schema you cannot implement invalidation for those. In user-land you will have to come up with your implementation of resource tracking by yourself. But don't be scared, continue reading, we will explore possible options later!

Author: Memo: drop the scared thing

3. Don't rely on any specific database/vendor lock-in. **Kind of.** ✳️

For Hasure and Postgraphile? Yes. For your own solution? No!

4. Easy to adopt with existing GraphQL schema. **No.** ❌

Switching to a framework like Postgraphile or Hasura is no easy task with an existing schema.

## GraphQL Live Queries over Subscriptions with JSON patch

Ideally, we only wanna send a patch to the client that gives instructions how to get from the previous execution result to the next. That has been a big flaw in the previous two implementations.

The RFCs and implementations for the `@defer` and `@stream` introduced ways of sending (delayed) partial results to clients. However, those "patch" operations are currently highly limited to a "replace at path" and "append to list" operation.

A format such as [JSON Patch](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6902) might be a better alternative for live queries.

Lets take a look at a library that actually tried to solve that exact problem with a `live` field that exposes both a result and a JSON patch field: [`graphql-live-subscriptions`](https://github.com/D1plo1d/graphql-live-subscriptions).

> 

Author: TODO: Add type definitions for schema

  if (params.action === 'update') {
    resultPromise.then((res) => {
      if (res?.id) {
        // invalidate `Post:1` on update
        liveQueryStore.invalidate(`${params.model}:${res.id}`);
      }
    });
  }

  return resultPromise;
});
```

Regarding the transport. Both `graphql-ws` (GraphQL over WebSocket), `graphql-helix` (GraphQL over SEE) and `@n1ru4l/socket-io-graphql-server` (GraphQL over Socket.io), support this library out of the box.

[You can find all libraries and a example todo app that sync across all connected clients over here.](https://github.com/n1ru4l/graphql-live-query)

[More information on how the `InMemoryLiveQueryStore` keeps track of resources here.](https://dev.to/n1ru4l/collecting-graphql-live-query-resource-identifier-with-graphql-tools-5fm5)

So let's take a look at this implementation regarding the aspects we used before.

1. Automatically updates execution result. **Yes.** ✅

The approach of pushing the invalidation responsibility to the user might at first seem like a drawback, but a smart abstraction (such as a ORM middleware), can result in pretty responsive applications.

2. Efficiently send updates to client. **No.** ❌

> The execution result published by the AsyncIterator is always a complete execution result. But, a library that can be plugged and create JSON patches from the last to the next execution result is already prototyped and planned to be released soon!

Author: TODO: update with information of https://github.com/n1ru4l/graphql-live-query/pull/243
